You ever wonder why your renders take an
hour, but professionals can pump them
out in seconds? It's not just the
hardware. It's knowing that one setting
that can shave off 95% of a render time.
In this video, I'm going to share my 10
favorite tricks for reducing render
times in cycles that I learned over 20
years of using Blender. Starting with
number one, instancing. The standard way
that beginners learn to copy objects in
Blender is shift D. But when you hit
render, Blender has to load that same
data into the render buffer twice.
That's not a big deal if there's only
two objects. But if you have thousands
of duplicated objects, Blender could be
wasting minutes reading everything one
by one. So instead of pressing shift D,
press Alt D. Now, instead of
duplicating, it's instancing, meaning
it's sharing the same object data across
multiple objects. Now, even if you have
thousands of copies, Blender only needs
to read the original once, reducing your
render time here by a whopping
95%. Frostm culling. Say you've made a
big environment in Blender with lots of
objects. Well, believe it or not, the
rest of the scene that is outside of the
camera is still contributing to the
render time because cycles needs to
calculate the bounce lighting and
reflections from everything. But if you
don't care about that, here is a quick
fix. Under render properties, enable
simplify and then turn on camera
culling. Then select all the objects in
your scene, go to object properties, and
while holding down the alt key, turn on
use camera coloring, which because you
held down alt, applies that to all of
the selected objects. Now, when you
render, anything outside of the frame is
automatically hidden. In this case,
reducing render times by a whopping
30%. Light clamping. If you're rendering
glass or liquids, core sticks will often
create bright spots known as fireflies,
and these take a really long time to
resolve. So, one quick hack is to just
decrease indirect light clamping. This
will set a ceiling for how bright a
bounced ray can be so that it can finish
faster. This is less accurate, but if
the difference is negligible, it's a
nice way to shave minutes off a
render. Simplify window glass. If you
add a window to your scene in Blender
and then you set the shader to glass,
cycles will say, "Oh, glass. I need to
calculate core sticks and then
everything in the scene gets darker,
there's fireflies, and it's pointless
because thin glass does not produce core
sticks." So, a quick solution to this is
to select your glass object, go to
object properties, and then under ray
visibility, uncheck shadow. Not only
does this result in more light passing
through the glass, but in this classroom
scene, it decreased render times by a
whopping
66%. Persistent data. When you start
rendering a scene in Blender, you may
notice that it doesn't start right away.
It first kicks off BVH building, shader
compilation, and loads geometry into
cycles. And if you're rendering an
animation, Blender will repeat this for
every frame despite nothing new being
loaded. So what professionals and any
right-minded person does is they go to
their render settings, performance, and
then under final render, turn on
persistent data. This now stores all of
that pre-render information into your
memory so it can be reused for future
frames. This is without a doubt one of
the biggest optimizations you can do for
any animation.
Noise threshold. You probably already
know that if you increase samples in
Blender, then you get less noise. But
what you might not know is that not all
areas need the same amount of samples.
For example, areas receiving lots of
light need less samples and darker areas
need more. So in Blender 2.83, they
introduced a feature called noise
threshold that's supposed to solve this.
So rather than render everything
uniformly, it stops rendering once the
desired threshold is met. And that would
be great except they made the default a
stupidly low 0.01. This threshold is so
low that it often does nothing because
you hit your max samples before you hit
the threshold. I think a much better
value is 0.03. The difference is
imperceptible, but it results in a 64%
faster render time. And if you're
thinking to go higher than this, you
will get more reduction, but just know
that you might get some splotchy shadows
in your animations.
Use smaller textures. You know when
you're visiting a texture site like
Polygon and you're given the option of
downloading a texture in 8K and it's
tempting, right? Cuz more detail is
obviously better. So why not just get
the highest size? I'll tell you why.
Because 8K textures can take twice as
long to load into the render buffer than
a 4K texture. So if your scene has lots
of textures, then it's especially
important to pick the smallest size
needed. And here's the other thing. you
almost never need 8K. Even if you
brought the camera right down to the
surface and render in ultra HD, there's
still almost no perceivable difference
between 8K and 4K. So, first, make sure
you're using the Polygon add-on so that
you can download and import thousands of
PBR textures right into Blender. Then,
in your add-on preferences, make sure
your default texture size is set to 4K.
So, now every time you download
something, you're getting the highest
meaningful size without being wasteful.
And on that rare occasion that you do
need the detail, you can still select 8K
from the drop down. But let's say it's
too late and you've already got a scene
with hundreds of oversized textures,
don't worry, you can still save it. Go
to simplify and then set a texture
limit. What this will do is it'll
automatically reduce those big textures
at render time. It does add a small
amount of overhead, but it's a good
option if your textures are maxing out
your VRAM. that will at least bring
everything back to normal so you'll get
some of the
benefits. Fast GI
approximation. By default, cycles will
use global illumination to calculate
light bounces. But there's a setting
found in render settings under light
paths called fast GI approximation. And
what this does is after a set amount of
bounces, cycles will switch from using
global illumination to a faster ambient
occlusionbased approximation, which is
much, much faster. Turned off, it'll
look like this. When you turn it on
after two bounces, it looks really
similar in quality, but it's 23% faster.
You can reduce it even further to one
bounce, and it'll be 77% faster, but the
difference is more noticeable. So,
adjust this bounce setting depending on
how much accuracy you
need. Switch to the GPU. By far the
simplest thing anyone can do. Go to user
preferences, system, and select optics
or CUDA if you've got an Nvidia card,
hip if you've got an AMD, or metal for
Mac. And unfortunately, if you don't see
any card listed there, then you're out
of luck. But most modern computers have
a GPU that is faster than their CPU.
Well, what about using both? That's
tempting. Why not just use CPU and GPU?
Get the best of both worlds. But it
doesn't work like that. Cuz if your CPU
is slower than your GPU, using both will
actually take longer than just using
your GPU alone. So if you're not sure,
just do a quick test. In my case,
enabling both was actually 6% slower
than using GPU alone. And a lot of
people don't know this, but you can also
turn on GPU for your Dinoiser and the
compositor, which will reduce render
times even
more. Simplify geometry. If you're
downloading random 3D models off the
internet and importing them into your
scene, you might unknowingly import a
model with more density than the sun.
All of these polies here mean that
Blender has to work extra hard to load
it into the memory and calculate all the
light and everything else. So, a quick
and dirty solution to dense geometry is
to use the decimate modifier. If you set
that ratio to something like 01, it'll
now render 60% faster with no difference
in quality. Just know that decimation
can create artifacts that are especially
noticeable on curved shiny objects. So
in those cases, try also doing an auto
smooth operation after. So it attempts
to detect the edges and make them sharp.
So those are my top 10 render hacks. But
what are yours? I know there are others
out there. So, please leave it in the
comments so that we can all learn and
get faster renders. And if you like this
video, why not check out some of these
others on the screen and I'll see you
there.
[Music]